# QUECHUA ASR - ACOUSTIC MODEL HMM

# Install:

HTK is a toolkit for use in research into automatic speech recognition
and has been developed by the Machine Intelligence Laboratory
(formerly know as the Speech Vision Robotics Group) at the
Cambridge University Engineering Department (http://mi.eng.cam.ac.uk) 
and Entropic Ltd (http://www.entropic.com).

Please visit the HTK homepage at the following address for more
information about HTK:

http://htk.eng.cam.ac.uk/

Download htk:

http://htk.eng.cam.ac.uk/download.shtml


# Usage:

You can create a model and train it using the commands in scripts_htk. The final model will be stored in the folder models/hmm10 The command will also output accuracy of the trainned model against the dataset.

# Results:

## Experiement approach

Each step of the experiment are described  in REPORT.MD.

* In order to build the Quechua Language recognation system, we need first to **prepare the data** for both training and testing. We need first to create a grammar for the system, wich will represent the chain of a spoken words beginning and ending with a silence `sil`. We will use also the [Quechua language dictionary](https://siminchikkunarayku.pe/), this dictionnary will allow to create a list of diphones representing each word. We will have also to extract the features of each recording from the `train`and `dev` datasets, using the `HCompV` command.

* In a second time, we will train a **diphone** Hidden Markov Model. The model will be re-estimate after introducing short pauses into the transcription in order to increase it's accuracy. We will also use the `HVite` command to align the phones with the training data.

Once the model is trained, it's possible to evaluate his preformance against the `dev` dataset.

## Results

| Model | Model identifier | Correctness |
| ----- |:----------------:| -----------:|
| Diphones Aligned | *hmm7* | 75.48% |
| Diphones | *hmm9* | 77.88% |
| Diphones Tied | *hmm10* | 80.30% |

However it should be noticed that when used the `HLEd` command show 2 warings:

```
WARNING [-2631]  ApplyTie: Macro T_sp has nothing to tie of type t in HHEd
WARNING [-2631]  ApplyTie: Macro T_sil has nothing to tie of type t in HHEd
```

This could indicate and issue this the configuration of the model concerning silence and short pauses. We can notice that the transcription generated by the final model (`hmm10`) on the `dev` dataset don't produce short pauses.


# Contact
We are always happy to hear from you:

rjzevallos.salazar@gmail.com \
camacho.l@pucp.pe
